has provided local decision-making and accessibility as well as banking products and services to Brazos Valley citizens.
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Bill Stroman has packed a lot of living into 80 years and a significant part of his journey was his tour of duty as an advisor for a Korean Marines unit during the Korean War.
His action came in a four deuces unit, that's a 4.2 inch mortar launcher,
Before and after, Bill Stroman attended three colleges, graduated, and spent most of his post-war career as a football coach.
18 years over two different stints at Jurgenton High School near San Antonio.
He also coached at Forestville, Humble, and Ganada.
He's not an Aggie grad, but his sons are, and Bill and Nancy Stroman were named the Aggie Parents of the Year in 1980.
It's a pleasure to welcome Colonel Bill Stroman, United States Marine Corps, to Veterans of the Valley.
Bill, indeed, it's a pleasure to have you here.
I want to sort of take you from your youth at Eagle Pass, and I know your brothers and your brother-in-law were all in World War II.
You graduated from high school about when World War II was ending, what you call the real war.
Then you went off to college, your first of three colleges, and that sort of led you into the military.
Sort of take us after high school into the military there.
Well, I graduated in 1946, but the war ended basically in the summer of 1945.
So I went off to college and ended up after a short stint at Texas Lutheran.
I went out to sell Ross where I thought they were having more fun.
And I saw a poster out there of a Marine Lieutenant in his dress blues, and it really did look like a great thing to be.
And I told the guys at the student union there, I said, I'm going to go down there and check into that program.
And they all said, well, that's pretty foolish, you know.
But I went down there, and I joined the Marine Corps Reserve in the PLC program, which later on, I
ended up after completing the first summer PLC I had to drop out of school for lack of funds and as a result I drifted away from that program and the Marine Corps didn't catch up with me until 1950, the summer of 1950 when all of a sudden they had something for us to do.
Right, right.
Now you went to three colleges.
You started off at Texas Lutheran College in Seguin and then you hitchhiked to Sol Ross because you had a lot of friends there and they were having some fun, is that right?
Well, that's correct.
At Christmas time, they were telling me how booming things were out there.
I'd played football that first year at Texas Lutheran and we had played Saul Ross and I thought, gee, I can play as well as these guys can, although they beat us.
And when I got out there, they had just joined a new conference and I was ineligible for a full year.
And by the time I was eligible, well, I had to
drop out of school and but that's how I ended up there and then when I started back I ended up a friend of mine said this great school up at North Texas and I said I don't want to go to girls school and this happened to be a girl list friend and she said oh no there's a school across town from there in North Texas and I said well I'd go there if I could get in the next morning she called and said she had called up there and said I'd have no problem so
I got out a map to look where Denton was.
You know, when you're born and raised in Eagle Pass, you haven't been too far from home.
Right.
You're in Denton.
You're a long way from Eagle Pass now.
I had to find out where it was.
You're still in Texas, but you're still a long way from Eagle Pass.
It was a great place to be because you met Nancy there.
She was a music student from the Northeast, and you met her, and you all were married in 1950.
Is that right?
That's correct.
In June of 1950, we were on our way back from a honeymoon in
New York City when the Korean War started.
So we knew right then that our plans were
on hold your honeymoon in new york city you you got off pretty pretty easy with the final bill i think you told me yes that's correct i found it this morning when we were when when i was digging around looking for pictures and whatnot and it was i had made an error it wasn't 27 it was three nights and it was 22.65 in new york city that's right yeah well you probably can't get a cup of coffee for that anymore right now
That's right.
You were coming home from your honeymoon.
That's when Korea started, when you were coming back to Texas.
And talk about sort of your entry into the Marine Corps, the boot camp, and before you first went overseas to Korea.
Well, we had to wait around.
I guess mainly because I had never been to boot camp was one of the reasons that it took a little longer to call me up.
My brother
had been in the Seabees, had stayed in the reserves, and every day he'd come home from the post office, and we'd say, well, do I have orders yet?
And he'd say no, and so one day he came home, and he said, yes, we have orders, mine.
And so he ended up...
going back before I did.
But I went to boot camp and in boot camp I was in the second recruit training battalion and it's kind of fortunate because they came out with an all more than anybody that had a college degree was eligible for a commissioning program.
And the first battalion, which is pretty hard
nose marine outfit that was a that was a regular recruit battalion right when you're not fighting right and so I got a chance to be interviewed and then when we got out of boot camp I went up to Pendleton and brought Nancy out to California and was out there and I heard one day some some guys were going somewhere for another screening for the same program I'd been in and so I went to see the first sergeant and he said yeah you look called around and checked around and whatnot and he said
Yeah, you're supposed to be down there, too.
So I went down there, and the lieutenant colonel and the major interviewed me, and that's the last I heard.
We went on maneuvers then out to San Clemente Island, and Nancy had gone up to Northern California to spend some time up there with my aunt.
And when we were out on San Clemente Island one day, the...
a mail clerk came running over and said, hey, Stroman, Stroman, you're going to be, you're going to Quantico, you're going to be an officer.
So I had to catch a mail plane back to Pendleton.
And you brought Nancy down and said, hey, we're going cross country.
We're in California and we've got to be in Quantico, Virginia, or you've got to be in Quantico, Virginia in a matter of days.
So you took a train trip across country, right?
That's correct.
We were very fortunate because I was, I didn't know how we were going to get there because we didn't have a whole lot of money, but some good Marine sergeant that was going there,
told me to go by private conveyance.
And I said, I don't have private conveyance.
And he said, that's all right.
The Marine Corps doesn't know that.
They're all advanced travel pay.
So Nancy made a big old sack of tuna fish sandwiches.
And my advanced travel pay was enough to get us a bus ticket to Los Angeles and a train ticket for both of us to New York City and me down to Quantico.
And that's how we got there.
You crossed the United States on $10 and a bag of tuna fish sandwiches.
That's right.
And had some change left over, I think, right?
Probably did.
Quantico, that's where you had your basic, I know, and you talked about how there were 500 of you that had college degrees at Quantico, and about 292 of you got your commission as second lieutenant, and you were one of those.
That's correct.
I was one of the 292 fortunate ones.
Yeah, you were a little surprised at that, weren't you?
Well, yeah, I was pretty dumb, you know.
I hadn't been in the Marine Corps, in the real Marine Corps very long, and I was in company with Master Sergeants and Gunnery Sergeants that had fought World War II, so I felt like I didn't really know very much, which is the fact of the matter, I really didn't.
You were commissioned May 29th of 1951, and your orders said, for duties beyond the seas.
That means that you weren't staying stateside.
You were going to Korea.
That's correct.
Right, right.
You were okay with that, but Nancy wasn't.
Nancy thought that she loved the Marine Corps up until that moment.
When I came home with the duty beyond the seas, that was something.
And we came home to Eagle Pass.
We had a delay en route on our way to Pendleton in 14th replacement draft.
And my brother had been in the 36th Infantry Division and made
landings at Anzio, where else did they land?
Southern France, all the way up.
He said, he asked me what I was doing, and I told him, well, I'm going to Korea.
And he said, well, what kind of job do you have there?
And I popped out my chest and said, I'm going to be an infantry officer.
And he said, you silly fools, you're going to get killed.
You were ready to go to Korea, and that
got delayed because they discovered that your outfit had no cold weather training.
So you went to Pickle Meadows, California for the cold weather training.
But eventually you got on a plane and you headed to Honolulu and then eventually to Korea to where everybody kept telling you, what are you all doing here?
That's exactly right.
They'd never seen that many lieutenants in one boat.
Talk about the Korean War, Bill.
A lot of people call it the Forgotten War.
You sort of make fun of it and say World War II was the real war, as if you weren't in a real war.
We know that that's not true.
The Korean War, the Korean conflict, as some people call it, sort of talk about the war, educate us a little bit about sort of what your role was as a mortarman.
And quite interesting, you were actually over in charge of an advisor to a unit of Korean Marines.
So there was a language situation too.
Just sort of talk about your duty in Korea as a Marine.
When I got there, I guess because I didn't know a whole lot about anything and probably I'd get less people killed being over with the mortars and it would be leading a bunch of real Marines around.
When I got there,
1st Korean Marine Corps Regiment had been fighting with attachment to the 1st Marine Division.
And they'd been fighting strictly just as an infantry unit with no support.
All their support came from the Marine Corps.
And they had just picked up the Four Deuce outfit.
And when my boss sent me over there to them, they were back so far from the line that we couldn't even reach the, I don't think that our martyrs were
would shoot far enough to to get over the hump on the thing so the first thing that uh that i did was suggest we move up a little closer and we did we moved up pretty close yes um i'm not sure they were that wild about moving up there but we certainly got there where we could where we could do damage to the enemy and uh um we uh as a matter of fact we uh
Our first fire mission got us all off to a good start when we registered in up there.
We were going to run a patrol that night out on a point that you'll show in the pictures a little later.
We had a pretty good shoot because evidently we shot them up pretty good.
We created some casualties out there on it and they sent an officer down there to this outpost to
check on the on their casualties and that patrol went out that night and captured him right and so that made everybody happy and I gained a lot of stature right there I've always said that was my good start with the with the Marine Corps because you captured a
an enemy officer.
Nobody had an officer in a long time, you know.
That's right.
The four deuces.
I know this is probably an outfit that you're very proud of and we're going to see some pictures about what a four deuces is a little bit in a minute, but
Talk about that weapon and sort of how it worked.
Well, you have one company of, at that time you had one company of four deuces supporting one regiment.
That was the regimental commander's artillery, so to speak.
He might have somebody else in 105 or 155 artillery that maybe was supporting him, was in a support role, but that was the regimental commander's artillery.
It was pretty interesting.
They did a lot of things.
We had a lot of problems because they were doing it.
We had a lot of problems with the base plates cracking because the ground was frozen and was so hard.
Matter of fact, I had one good friend, Lieutenant Cusack, that got his purple heart because they set up a 4.2.
He was with another regiment, with a Marine regiment, set up a 4.2.
So we're on a mine, on a frozen mine.
And I think about the 10th round, the mine went off.
And then he got zapped with that, but not bad.
Not bad enough to come home either.
Right.
When you're shooting at the enemy, obviously they're shooting back and you underplay somewhat the resistance or the danger that you were in.
But obviously there was, because I know that at one time you lost count of the incoming, that so much of it was coming in.
But I guess you look at it as your job.
I asked you the other day if you were frightened and you said, sure, but you had a job to do.
Well, that's true, and as an advisor to the four digits, I had to look after the forward observers that were all up with the battalions, so that took me up to their areas.
We actually split our company a little later because we were stretched out.
When we were on the East Coast, the 1st Korean Marine Regiment in the 1st Division, we hadn't so much territory.
We strung out like a week's wash across there.
We couldn't even traverse and support the entire regiment, so we had to split them and went over.
Yeah, I moved around quite a bit with it.
Christmas of 1951, you spent, you were in Korea, and then into 1952, and you were there until July of 1952, I believe is right.
And that's when you left Korea and you came home.
And we're going to talk about sort of your post-war career.
We're going to talk about a football coaching around the state of Texas, all too.
But right now, we've got some pictures that you all have, you've supplied us, that Bill and Nancy have supplied us.
And we're going to go to those and let you talk about those.
There is a young Marine, Bill Stroman, right there.
When was this picture taken?
How old were you?
Well, I was 18, I guess.
That was taken in 1947, shortly after I had joined, and I was on my tour at PLC at Quantico.
Good-looking Marine right there.
I love this picture.
You grew a mustache.
I like the hat, I like the stance, I like the mustache.
You look like a real dude right there.
You notice I got my 38 slung there on my right side.
You can barely see it.
And when was this taken and where?
That was taken in 1951, in the winter of 1951 when I was with the KMC's.
And that was when we were in the north lip of the Punchbowl right there.
You can kind of get an idea of the terrain behind
Why do I have a feeling that that picture is posed?
Somebody said, Bill, I want you to look good here.
Oh, probably as a matter of fact, I probably gave him the camera to take a picture of him.
All right, let's move on.
Okay, here's 4.2, one of the four deuces.
Sort of talk about what we're looking at.
This is similar to the weapon that you had, is that right?
Yes, it's very similar.
I think that the barrels may be a little longer, and of course, that one's sitting up on top of the deck, and ours were dug down.
We had them dug in, so I'm just looking at it.
My first thought, man, that thing's a long tube out there.
It's a pretty simple thing.
You just put the charges on that you want, and the FDC figures everything out, and you drop it in that top end of it.
When it gets to the bottom, that hits the firing pin, and here it comes out again.
and it's got a pretty good range.
We've got another picture that I want to show.
A little bit more modern day of the same weapon.
This is an incredible picture that we found on the internet.
You can actually see the shell leaving the muzzle in that picture.
But that's the four deuces.
Yes.
Right there.
Okay.
What are we looking at here?
Well, you're looking down from our lines right up on the ridge line.
We were dug in right on the north lip of the
of the punch bowl, and that's looking off into no man's land down there.
And earlier I mentioned the place that we registered in the first time, and it's the very top center of the picture.
You can just barely see a little bit of a knoll sitting in there, and that's where the enemy had an outpost out there that we raided that night and had the great success that made people think I knew what I was doing.
That's a good representation of the terrain of Korea during the Korean War.
Yes, that's looking almost straight down.
Right.
That looks cold.
It was cold.
Here's your unit in San Diego in 1951, and you are, if people can look, the second from the top row far right.
That's Bell Stroman, second from the top row far right.
That's your platoon unit there in San Diego.
Okay, let's move on to the next picture.
We're going to talk coming up about your career after your military service, and that means an awful lot of football coaching.
And we mentioned in the outset about you being 18 years at Jourdenton, and that's you, the head football coach, and a couple of special football players flanking you.
Who are they?
Well, that's on the left-hand side, number 50 there is Bill.
That's my oldest son.
And on the other side, 53, Mark, my youngest son, who incidentally also became a Marine.
May I say you look exactly like a football coach in that picture with the whistle and the coaching shorts.
Here are your sons.
This is Mark on the left and Bill on the right.
This is a special occasion.
Is this a wedding of some sort?
Yes, it was a wedding, yes.
Okay.
And there's you and Mark.
Talk about Mark.
I know that he spent some time in the Marines as a mortarman also.
Artilleryman.
Artilleryman, excuse me, at Desert Storm.
Is that right?
That's correct.
This was just prior to going to Desert Storm.
We were living in Ghaneda at that time, and we thought we needed a father and son picture there, but we had that taken.
That's a great picture.
I think he's gained a little weight since then.
And this is on a recent cruise, and I wanted people to see your lovely wife, Nancy.
And there you are on one of your cruises.
You all like to take cruises, and there you all are.
Wonderful-looking couple.
You were married in 1950, so you all are coming up here on, what, 58 years now?
Next month.
Right.
There you go.
Some great pictures.
Okay, we're through with Korea and you come home.
You stay in the Marines, in the reserves, you stay there, but you start your career in Texas as an educator and as a football coach like we just saw.
That's correct.
Sort of take us there because you had a few stops as a football coach and I guess it started in Floresville, is that right?
Yes, that was my first coaching job in Floresville and was a pretty good experience.
I worked under a really fine head coach there, a guy by the name of Ralph Starnes,
He didn't live to be a real old man.
He also was a Marine, come to think of it.
He taught me an awful lot, but I was there two years, and I got the head coaching job at Jourdenden, which I was still pretty young to have that job.
The president of the school board asked me, said, when I was interviewed, he asked me, he said, do you think you can beat Pleasanton?
And I said, yes, sir.
Shortly thereafter, they said, you're hired.
And we beat him.
You were at Jurgenton for a short stint, I believe four years.
Yes, sir.
And then you decided to leave coaching for a while and determined pretty quickly that that was a mistake.
You missed coaching and you wanted to get back in.
So sort of talk about that between time from Jurgenton the first stint and Jurgenton the second stint.
Well, we were, it was pretty tough to make a living teaching in those days, I think.
If you were ill, you had to pay your own sub, which wasn't very costly, $5 a day for a sub.
And we had no hospitalization.
And by that time, we'd had a couple of kiddos.
It was a real concern.
And so we'd had a pretty good year in 58.
We didn't get beat to the state semifinals.
So I thought, well, it's a pretty good time to try something else.
And I had some friends, and they offered me some various things.
And so I did some other things during that time in real life.
I always call that the real life.
Then in 1965, we got our feet on the ground.
Nancy had her degree.
we had an opportunity to go back to Jordan and so we did and we were able to go back to what we really like to do and I think that was a good time in my life and I need to say this because to me it solidified what I was doing with kids because I had had a good job and I'd made good money and during that when I went back to coaching and teaching
I knew that I did it because that's what I truly loved to do and not something that maybe I just happened to fall into or something that's the only thing I could do.
And I always thought maybe that's all of our teachers ought to be like that.
If they're not teaching because it's the greatest thing in the world to do, then they ought to not be doing it.
1965, you mentioned you went back to Jordan and this time you spent 14 years there as the coach.
And then after that time, you were, as you say, you were reassigned.
Somebody thought you couldn't coach football anymore.
Well, it took them a while to find out I didn't know how to coach football, and so I was reassigned.
But you developed a love of track, and you became a track coach then, which you later became a track coach at Hummel High School, too.
Well, yes.
I've got a good background starting in track at Floresville because that coach really believed that kids ought to run, and it was a good thing, and I liked it.
It took me a long time to really learn how to coach track, but I think that when I finished up, I could coach it pretty well, even to this day.
You and Nancy didn't get to the Brazos Valley permanently until 2001, but you almost got here a lot earlier.
Talk about your interview with Merrill Green, and you almost became a part of the athletic of the Bryan ISD, but two phone calls came within a few minutes of each other, right?
That's correct.
My oldest son knew I was looking, and he had mentioned he had run into Merrill Green
They were pouring concrete or something.
And Merle Green said, well, you know, you need to get your daddy to give me a call.
He said, because any young man that talks that well about his father, I'd like to meet.
And so I got an interview with him and came up and explained what I was looking for in the middle school type thing.
And he thought that was pretty good.
He said, we don't have that opening.
He said, but it sounds good.
And he said, I'll see what I can figure out.
In the meantime, I took the job.
or I had interviewed down in the Houston area.
And I picked up the phone and I had called Sam Mosley.
Most folks around here remember Sam or at least they remember Mike.
His dad was the AD at Humble.
And I told him, I said, I'll take the job.
I hung up the phone and I walked about five steps and the phone rang and it was Merle on the phone.
He said, I've got it all worked out.
You can come here.
And I said, man, I'd love to come there, but I've already taken a job at Humble.
So it took us a little longer to get here.
You were in Humble for three years and middle school athletic coordinator.
Two years.
Two years there.
Right.
And then as a track coach.
And then Nancy said, move me to the country.
And so you all went to Ganada, which is down Highway 59 south of Houston.
I guess sort of halfway between Houston and Victoria, I guess it is.
And you all spent some time down there.
You coached, you were actually an assistant football coach for a couple of years there, right?
I coached the backs and the linebackers for Tom Jones, who...
I had the head job, and we enjoyed it.
We coached two years, then I had one year I just taught, and then they made me an elementary principal, and I really enjoyed it.
We're almost out of time, but I want you to tell people what the superintendent of Ganada told you when you told them that you all needed computers at the school.
I ought to not pick on Frank like that.
It's a funny story.
I went in and I told him.
I went in there and told him, I said, Frank, we've got to get computers in this school.
And he looked at me and said, oh, heck, coach.
He says, I've already bought them overhead projectors.
So that's how far we were from that.
You were trying to drag him kicking and screaming into the 20th century, right?
And we did.
And you finally did.
We saw pictures of Billy and Mark, and I know that they are proud Aggies.
And you all became even prouder in 1980.
when you and Nancy became the Aggie Parents of the Year.
Talk about your sons.
We've got about a minute left.
And sort of, even though you're not an Aggie as far as a grad, I know that you feel like one.
Oh, I think we are.
Right.
Well, I was so pleased with the way things turned out for my kiddos going to A&M, of course, that I tried to encourage a lot of other kids that I taught to go there.
I either tried to talk them into going there or the Marine Corps.
if they were pretty good kids.
So it all worked out really good doing that, and we have missed a home football game one or two since 1973, so that's pretty good.
It's great to have you here, and we are out of time, but thank you to you and to Nancy for your service and being great members of this community.
We enjoyed it very much.
We enjoy living here, too.
Thank you, Bill.
As you can see, Bill Stroman's service has gone far beyond his service in uniform.
As a coach and teacher, his influence on young people over the years has surely been handed down from those kids to their kids to their kids and will continue.
We salute Colonel Bill Stroman for his Marine service.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
In honor of the veterans who have served our country, both past and present, First National Bank, a Franklin family community bank, proudly sponsors Veterans of the Valley.
Since 1862, First National has provided local decision making and accessibility, as well as banking products and services to Brazos Valley citizens.